boards/seeedstudio-xiao-esp32c6: add initial support (#22400)
RIOT-OS/RIOT: boards/seeedstudio-xiao-esp32c6/doc.md

### Deep Sleep and Wake-up

On the XIAO ESP32C6, only GPIO0, GPIO1 and GPIO2 of these RTC-capable pins are broken out
and can therefore be used as wake-up sources.

### Board Pinout

The following figure shows the pinout as configured by default board
definition.

<img src="https://files.seeedstudio.com/wiki/SeeedStudio-XIAO-ESP32C6/img/XIAO_ESP32-C6_front_pinout.png" alt="Seeed Studio ESP32-C6 Xiao Pinout Front" width=800 />
<img src="https://files.seeedstudio.com/wiki/SeeedStudio-XIAO-ESP32C6/img/XIAO_ESP32-C6_back_pinout.png" alt="Seeed Studio ESP32-C6 Xiao Pinout Back" width=800 />

### Board documentation

- [schematic](https://files.seeedstudio.com/wiki/SeeedStudio-XIAO-ESP32C6/XIAO_ESP32_C6_v1.0_SCH_260114.pdf) (PDF)
- [pinout](https://files.seeedstudio.com/wiki/SeeedStudio-XIAO-ESP32C6/res/XIAO_ESP32C6_Pinout.xlsx) (XLSX)
- [ESP32-C6 datasheet](https://files.seeedstudio.com/wiki/SeeedStudio-XIAO-ESP32C6/res/esp32-c6_datasheet_en.pdf) (PDF)
- [ESP32-C6 Technical Reference Manual](https://www.espressif.com/sites/default/files/documentation/esp32-c6_technical_reference_manual_en.pdf) (PDF)
- [product page](https://www.seeedstudio.com/Seeed-Studio-XIAO-ESP32C6-p-5884.html)

> - [wiki page](https://wiki.seeedstudio.com/xiao_esp32c6_getting_started/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Schematic](https://files.seeedstudio.com/wiki/SeeedStudio-XIAO-ESP32C6/XIAO_ESP32_C6_v1.0_SCH_260114.pdf) (PDF)
- [Pinout](https://files.seeedstudio.com/wiki/SeeedStudio-XIAO-ESP32C6/res/XIAO_ESP32C6_Pinout.xlsx) (XLSX)
- [ESP32-C6 Datasheet](https://files.seeedstudio.com/wiki/SeeedStudio-XIAO-ESP32C6/res/esp32-c6_datasheet_en.pdf) (PDF)
- [ESP32-C6 Technical Reference Manual](https://www.espressif.com/sites/default/files/documentation/esp32-c6_technical_reference_manual_en.pdf) (PDF)
- [Product Page](https://www.seeedstudio.com/Seeed-Studio-XIAO-ESP32C6-p-5884.html)
- [Wiki Page](https://wiki.seeedstudio.com/xiao_esp32c6_getting_started/)
```

high-performance core running at up to 160 MHz and a low-power core
clocked up to 20 MHz.

- Wi-Fi 6 2.4 GHz
- Bluetooth 5 (LE)
- IEEE 802.15.4 (Zigbee, Thread)
- Memory: 512KB of SRAM, and 4MB of Flash
- Size: 21 x 17.8mm
- Battery charging chip: Supports lithium battery charge and discharge management
- Ultra-Low Power: Deep sleep power consumption is about 15μA
- Battery charge indicator red LED
- RF switch for built-in or external antenna
- Working temperature: -40°C ~ 85°C

<img src="https://files.seeedstudio.com/wiki/SeeedStudio-XIAO-ESP32C6/img/xiaoc6.jpg" alt="Seeed Studio ESP32-C6 Xiao" width=200px />

## Hardware

### MCU

Most features of the board are provided by the ESP32-C6 SoC. For detailed
information about the ESP32-C6 variant (family) and ESP32x SoCs,
see section \ref esp32_mcu_esp32 "ESP32 SoC Series".

### Board Configuration

The Seeed Studio ESP32-C6 Xiao board has a reset button and a bootloader
button, as well as a user LED on GPIO15.
After reset, the bootloader button may be used by the application.

To select the board, add the following to the make command line:

```shell
make BOARD=seeedstudio-xiao-esp32c6
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think this is pretty much standard RIOT stuff, no need to explain it again here.

GPIO overview:

- 1 x UART

> - 1 x LP_UART  (not supported)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 1 x LP_UART (not supported)
```

- 1 x I2C
- 1 x LP_I2C (not supported)
- 1 x SPI

> - 11 x GPIO(PWM only 3 defined by default)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 11 x GPIO (only 3 PWM channels defined by default)
```

- 7 x ADC (3 usable)
- 1 x SDIO (not supported)

The purpose for which a GPIO is used depends on which module

> or function is used first. For example, if module `periph_spi` is not used,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or function is used first. For example, if the `periph_spi` module is not used,
```

SPI_DEV(0):MISO | GPIO20              | \ref esp32_spi_interfaces "SPI Interfaces"
SPI_DEV(0):MOSI | GPIO18              | \ref esp32_spi_interfaces "SPI Interfaces"
SPI_DEV(0):CS0  | GPIO21              | \ref esp32_spi_interfaces "SPI Interfaces"
UART_DEV(0):TxD | GPIO16              | \ref esp32_uart_interfaces "UART interfaces"
UART_DEV(0):RxD | GPIO17              | \ref esp32_uart_interfaces "UART interfaces"

For detailed information about the peripheral configurations of ESP32-C6
boards, see section \ref esp32_peripherals "Common Peripherals".

### RF Antenna Switch

The board has an RF switch to toggle between the built-in
ceramic antenna and an external U.FL antenna. It is controlled by two GPIOs:

- GPIO3 (RF switch enable, active low) powers the switch.
- GPIO14 selects the antenna: low for the built-in ceramic antenna (default),
  high for the external U.FL antenna.

The built-in ceramic antenna is used by default, so no configuration is
required for the common case. The `board_init` function configures the RF
switch accordingly at startup.

To use the external U.FL antenna instead, enable the

> `CONFIG_XIAO_ESP32C6_EXT_ANTENNA` option, for example by adding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`CONFIG_XIAO_ESP32C6_EXT_ANTENNA` option, for example by adding
the following line to the application's Makefile:
```

```Makefile
CFLAGS += -DCONFIG_XIAO_ESP32C6_EXT_ANTENNA=1
```

to the application's Makefile.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

@note The external antenna path has not been tested due to a missing external antenna.

### Battery Usage

The XIAO ESP32C6 series features a built-in power management chip, allowing it to be powered independently

> by a battery or to charge the battery through its USB port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The XIAO ESP32C6 series features a built-in power management chip, allowing
it to be powered independently by a battery or to charge the battery through
its USB port.
```

For connecting a battery to your XIAO, it's recommend using a qualified rechargeable 3.7V lithium battery.
When soldering the battery, carefully distinguish between the positive and negative terminals.
The negative electrode pad should be located on the left side near the silk screen marking "D8",

> while the positive electrode pad should be located on the right side near the silk screen marking "D5".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For connecting a battery to your XIAO, it's recommend using a qualified
rechargeable 3.7V lithium battery. When soldering the battery, carefully
distinguish between the positive and negative terminals. The negative
electrode pad should be located on the left side near the silk screen
marking "D8", while the positive electrode pad should be located on the
right side near the silk screen marking "D5".
```

@note When the board is powered from the battery, no voltage is present on
      the 5V pin.

> @note The XIAO ESP32C6 has a red indicator light for battery charging, similar to the XIAO ESP32S3:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
@note The XIAO ESP32C6 has a red indicator light for battery charging,
similar to the XIAO ESP32S3:
```

<!--

> SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2026 Stepan Konoplev

Reviewer: Please revisit the copyright headers. I can see that many files were copied from another board and the author was most likely Gunar Schorcht.

If you copy a file and modify it, you can *add* your own copyright if you made significant changes, but you can never remove someone else's.

## Hardware

### MCU

Most features of the board are provided by the ESP32-C6 SoC. For detailed
information about the ESP32-C6 variant (family) and ESP32x SoCs,
see section \ref esp32_mcu_esp32 "ESP32 SoC Series".

### Board Configuration

The Seeed Studio ESP32-C6 Xiao board has a reset button and a bootloader
button, as well as a user LED on GPIO15.
After reset, the bootloader button may be used by the application.

To select the board, add the following to the make command line:

```shell
make BOARD=seeedstudio-xiao-esp32c6
```

GPIO overview:

- 1 x UART
- 1 x LP_UART  (not supported)
- 1 x I2C
- 1 x LP_I2C (not supported)
- 1 x SPI
- 11 x GPIO(PWM only 3 defined by default)
- 7 x ADC (3 usable)
- 1 x SDIO (not supported)

The purpose for which a GPIO is used depends on which module
or function is used first. For example, if module `periph_spi` is not used,
the GPIOs listed in SPI configuration can be used for other purposes.

The following table shows the default board configuration.
This configuration can be overridden by \ref esp32_application_specific_configurations
"application-specific configurations".

> <center>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The `<center>` tags break the table in the Guide side, so it's better to not use them (although a lot of older doc.md files still do because we haven't migrated them yet).

Function        | Pin                                      | Configuration
:---------------|:-----------------------------------------|:-------------
BUTTON0(Boot)   | GPIO9                                    | GPIO9 is a [strapping pin](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esptool/en/latest/esp32c6/advanced-topics/boot-mode-selection.html)
LED0            | GPIO15                                   | User LED (low active)

> ADC/LP_GPIO     | GPIO0, GPIO1, GPIO2                      | \ref esp32_adc_channels "ADC Channels"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ADC/LP_GPIO     | GPIO0, GPIO1, GPIO2 | \ref esp32_adc_channels "ADC Channels"
```

If you use less whitespaces, the lines don't have to be as awfully long.

SPI_DEV(0):CS0  | GPIO21                                   | \ref esp32_spi_interfaces "SPI Interfaces"
UART_DEV(0):TxD | GPIO16                                   | \ref esp32_uart_interfaces "UART interfaces"
UART_DEV(0):RxD | GPIO17                                   | \ref esp32_uart_interfaces "UART interfaces"
</center>
<br>

For detailed information about the peripheral configurations of ESP32-C6
boards, see section \ref esp32_peripherals "Common Peripherals".

### RF Antenna Switch

The board has an RF switch to toggle between the built-in
ceramic antenna and an external U.FL antenna. It is controlled by two GPIOs:

- GPIO3 (RF switch enable, active low) powers the switch.
- GPIO14 selects the antenna: low for the built-in ceramic antenna (default),
  high for the external U.FL antenna.

The built-in ceramic antenna is used by default, so no configuration is
required for the common case. The `board_init` function configures the RF
switch accordingly at startup.

To use the external U.FL antenna instead, enable the
`CONFIG_XIAO_ESP32C6_EXT_ANTENNA` option, for example by adding

> ​```

Reviewer: `````suggestion
​```Makefile
`````

CFLAGS += -DCONFIG_XIAO_ESP32C6_EXT_ANTENNA=1
​```

to the application's Makefile.

@note The external antenna path has not been tested due to a missing external antenna.

### Battery Usage

The XIAO ESP32C6 series features a built-in power management chip, allowing it to be powered independently
by a battery or to charge the battery through its USB port.

For connecting a battery to your XIAO, it's recommend using a qualified rechargeable 3.7V lithium battery.
When soldering the battery, carefully distinguish between the positive and negative terminals.
The negative electrode pad should be located on the left side near the silk screen marking "D8,"

> while the positive electrode pad should be located on the right side near the silk screen marking "D5."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The negative electrode pad should be located on the left side near the silk screen marking "D8",
while the positive electrode pad should be located on the right side near the silk screen marking "D5".
```

@note When the board is powered from the battery, no voltage is present on
      the 5V pin.

@note The XIAO ESP32C6 has a red indicator light for battery charging, similar to the XIAO ESP32S3:

The red light behavior for the XIAO ESP32C6 is as follows:

- When no battery is connected:
  - The red light turns on when the Type-C cable is connected and turns off after 30 seconds.
- When a battery is connected and the Type-C cable is plugged in for charging:
  - The red light flashes.
- When the battery is fully charged via the Type-C connection:

>   - The red light turns off.

Reviewer: Everything after `ESP32S3:` is not part of the `Note` block anymore. It'll look weird in Doxygen.

To monitor the battery voltage on the XIAO ESP32C6, similar to the XIAO ESP32C3,
you'll need to solder a 200k resistor in a 1:2 configuration.
This setup reduces the voltage by half, allowing safe monitoring through the A0 analog port.

> Sample Code can be found at [battery sample code](https://wiki.seeedstudio.com/xiao_esp32c6_getting_started/#sample-code)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sample Code can be found in [the Seeed Wiki](https://wiki.seeedstudio.com/xiao_esp32c6_getting_started/#sample-code).
```
